Add Best Practice: Repository content filtering (#33497)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/best-practices/best_practices_dependencies.adoc

`<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:structuring-builds,#structuring-builds>>`

[[use_content_filtering]]
== Use Content Filtering when using multiple Repositories

When using multiple repositories, use <<filtering_repository_content.adoc#repository-content-filtering,repository content filtering>> to ensure that the correct artifacts are resolved from the appropriate repository.

=== Explanation

If you use more than one repository, you should use content filtering to make sure you take the right artifacts from the right repository by using a content filter.

> The repository that contains the remaining artifacts should come at the end, so we only query it if we don’t find the included modules in the other repositories.

Reviewer: Yes, I think the original had a few problems:

I don't think we should say "artifacts", since 1) I think most build authors will think in terms of dependencies and 2) both the artifact and the metadata are affected.

I think saying the "right artifacts" is misleading - there is only one possible set of artifacts in each repo, so it's all about picking the right repo, this makes it sounds like there might be more than 1 set of artifacts in each repo.

"contains the remaining artifacts should come at the end" - which artifacts are remaining?  It depends on the order we walk the deps graph, which is hard to predict.

> Another option is to use the <<filtering_repository_content.adoc#sec:declaring-content-repositories,exclusiveContent>> if you are able to. Here, the order doesn’t matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should also use the <<filtering_repository_content.adoc#sec:declaring-content-repositories,exclusiveContent>> feature to restrict a dependency to a certain repository regardless of declaration order.
```

> Content filtering has three main benefits:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Content filtering has three main benefits:
```

> - **Performance** since you only query one repository for a given artifact

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we want to note that querying a repository that does not have an artifact is the biggest issue, as you are doing unnecessary potentially slow network calls?

> - **Performance** since you only query one repository for a given artifact

Reviewer: I think the biggest issue is potential supply chain attacks by someone adding a malicious version of a dep to a repo checked earlier, preempting the proper version from being used.

- **Security** by avoiding leaking what dependencies are used in a private project and being more resilient to supply chain attacks by specifying where each artifact is coming from
- **Reliability** when some repositories contain invalid or incorrect metadata or artifacts

=== Example

==== Don't Do This

Don't add multiple repositories without content filtering:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-avoid/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=content-filtering-avoid]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-avoid/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=content-filtering-avoid]"]
====

==== Do This Instead

> Use exclusive content filtering to ensure that the additional repositories are used only for the expected artifacts:

Reviewer: 🤔 Saying to use filtering for "additional" repositories is odd when the filtered repo is listed first in the example code.

Also below this snippet.

Reviewer 3: +1

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-exclusive-do/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=content-filtering-do]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-exclusive-do/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=content-filtering-do]"]
====

Alternatively, using content filtering for additional repositories while having the fallback repository at the end is also a good option.

> NOTE: Not using content filtering on the last repository may be a security risk since you might resolve artifacts that you expect to be resolved from other repositories with content filtering from it, so make sure you trust the repository.

Reviewer: Moving this note below the example code might be better.

> NOTE: Not using content filtering on the last repository may be a security risk since you might resolve artifacts that you expect to be resolved from other repositories with content filtering from it, so make sure you trust the repository.

Author: For example, you want to express that everything with groupId `androidx.activity` comes from the google repository. If you don't exclude that group id from mavenCentral, then someone could publish an artifact with groupId `androidx.activity` to Maven central, that is not in the google repository. You would end up downloading this one contrary to the mental model that all `androidx.activity` dependencies should come from the google repository. If you made a typo in your artifact id, it might even be that the artifact on Maven central is malicious.

> NOTE: Not using content filtering on the last repository may be a security risk since you might resolve artifacts that you expect to be resolved from other repositories with content filtering from it, so make sure you trust the repository.

Reviewer: I understand this failure scenario.  I don't think it is clearly explained by the text.  Maybe it would be best to write out the example?  

As written I'm confused why I would _expect_ to find my dep in a filtered repo and then be surprised when it isn't there because: 1) This happens silently if the dep is also present in the last "fallback" repo, 2) I don't think there's a way to see which repo supplied which dep, so how would you become aware this is happening due to a typo?  Especially if we're recommending you leave a fallback repo that might contain your dep.  This seems to argue for using `exclusiveContent` instead, to get a not found error on a typo.

> NOTE: Not using content filtering on the last repository may be a security risk since you might resolve artifacts that you expect to be resolved from other repositories with content filtering from it, so make sure you trust the repository.

Reviewer 2: This is only true for users that don't enable signature verification. I wonder if we want to link to that as a note here.

> NOTE: Not using content filtering on the last repository may be a security risk since you might resolve artifacts that you expect to be resolved from other repositories with content filtering from it, so make sure you trust the repository.

Reviewer: Mentioning verification here and linking in the references is a great idea.

> NOTE: Not using content filtering on the last repository may be a security risk since you might resolve artifacts that you expect to be resolved from other repositories with content filtering from it, so make sure you trust the repository.

Reviewer: After working on this a bit, I think it's already enough for one item.  I'd like to save verification for a separate future item (which could then be linked to from here).

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-do/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=content-filtering-do]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-do/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=content-filtering-do]"]
====

=== Tags

> `<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:dependencies,#dependencies>>`

Reviewer: 🤔 I think this is worth a new `repositories` tag.

Reviewer 3: +1

`<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:structuring-builds,#structuring-builds>>`

[[use_content_filtering]]
== Use Content Filtering when using multiple Repositories

When using multiple repositories, use <<filtering_repository_content.adoc#repository-content-filtering,repository content filtering>> to ensure that dependencies are resolved from an appropriate repository.

=== Explanation

> If your build declares more than one repository, you should also declare content filters on these repositories to ensure you search for and obtain dependencies from the correct place.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your build declares more than one repository, you should declare content filters on these repositories to ensure you search for and obtain dependencies from the correct place.
```

> The repository that contains the remaining artifacts should come at the end, so we only query it if we don’t find the included modules in the other repositories.

Reviewer 3: Can we be more explicit, something like:
```suggestion
The repository that contains the remaining artifacts should be declared at the end of your settings script, so it is only queried if the included modules are not found in the earlier repositories.
```

> The repository that contains the remaining artifacts should come at the end, so we only query it if we don’t find the included modules in the other repositories.

Reviewer 2: I think we need to explain here briefly that the repositories are queried in order of set up in the repositories block, and then lead to the suggestion to have no content filter on the "fall back" repository that is at the end of the list.

Another option is to use the <<filtering_repository_content.adoc#sec:declaring-content-repositories,exclusiveContent>> if you are able to. Here, the order doesn’t matter.

> Content filtering has three main benefits:

Reviewer 3: Can we number these instead of using bullet points?

- **Performance** since you only query one repository for a given artifact
- **Security**, by avoiding asking potentially every repository for every dependency (even ones they shouldn't contain), and improving resiliency to supply chain attacks by specifying exactly where to obtain each artifact

> - **Reliability**, by avoiding searching repositories that contain invalid or incorrect metadata or artifacts for particular dependencies

Reviewer 3: Added numbered list and dot as an example of my previous comment:
```suggestion
3. **Reliability**, by avoiding searching repositories that contain invalid or incorrect metadata or artifacts for particular dependencies.
```

=== Example

==== Don't Do This

Don't add multiple repositories without content filtering:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-avoid/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=content-filtering-avoid]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-avoid/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=content-filtering-avoid]"]
====

==== Do This Instead

Use exclusive content filtering to ensure that the additional repositories are used only for the expected artifacts:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-exclusive-do/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=content-filtering-do]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/content-filtering-exclusive-do/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=content-filtering-do]"]
====

Alternatively, using content filtering for additional repositories while having the fallback repository at the end is also a good option.

> NOTE: Not using content filtering on the last repository may be a security risk since you might resolve artifacts that you expect to be resolved from other repositories with content filtering from it, so make sure you trust the repository.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
NOTE: If you don’t apply content filtering to the last declared repository, you may inadvertently resolve artifacts from it that were intended to come from earlier, trusted repositories with content filtering. This can pose a security risk, so make sure you fully trust the repository.
```
